---
layout: page
subheadline: "Research"
title: "Do Basel III Capital and Liquidity Ratios Predict Bank Distress?
Evidence from Europe"
teaser: "This paper develops a novel early-warning signal model for European
listed and non-listed banks to study the ability of the measures introduced or
improved by Basel III to predict bank distress."
categories:
  - research
tags:
  - Basel III
  - Bank Distress
  - European Banks
  - Distance-to-Default
header: no
image:
    <!-- title: mediaplayer_js-title.jpg -->
    <!-- thumb: mediaplayer_js-thumb.jpg -->
    <!-- homepage: MacroPrud_pic1.jpg -->
    <!-- caption: Photo by Corey Blaz -->
    <!-- caption_url: https://blaz.photography/ -->
permalink: /research/basel/	
mediaplayer: false
---

<!-- This paper develops a novel early warning signal model for European banks and -->
<!-- studies the extent to which the capital and liquidity measures proposed by Basel -->
<!-- III regulation were predictive of distress events of Western European banks -->
<!-- during the 2008-2012 financial crisis. -->

Basel III directives (Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, 2008, 2010
and2011) were designed to address the inadequacies of the existing Basel II
framework, exposed by the widespread financial turmoil following the financial
meltdown in 2008. The prevailing view underlying the changes in Basel regulation
is that the recent financial disruptions in the Western banking systems stem
from the interplay of the following major factors: (1) insufficient
capitalization, both in terms of quantity and quality of capital, that failed to
capture the build-up of on-and-off-balance sheet risks, (2) excessive maturity
mismatch, driven by bank funding structures biased towards short-term funding
sources, and (3) insufficient holding of high quality liquid assets that would
allow financial institutions to independently cope with short-term funding
squeezes.

Basel III attempts to address these shortcomings by updating the existing
capital regulation, as well as by introducing a new liquidity regulation, a
hitherto uncharted territory in the previous Basel accords. With respect to the
former, it aims to increase the quantity and quality of bank capital buffers by:
(1) raising the minimum level of core Tier 1 equity capital to 4.5% of
risk-weighted assets, (2) introducing an additional capital conversion buffer of
2.5%, and a countercyclical buffer of 0-2.5%, (3) increasing the quality of the
capital base by requiring intangible assets such as goodwill and deferred taxes
to be deducted from regulatory capital, and (4) improving risk coverage by
insisting on stronger capital treatment of securitization and trading book
exposures, as well as by stipulating more stringent requirements pertaining to
counterparty credit risk.

With regard to liquidity regulation, Basel III introduces two new liquidity
ratios: (1) the liquidity coverage ratio and (2) the net stable funding
ratio. The former focuses at the ability of banks to meet short-term cash
outflows in stressed funding conditions, and the latter is a longer term
structural ratio that measures the liquidity mismatches of the entire bank
balance sheet. The proposed liquidity regulation stipulates that banks hold a
minimum level of both ratios, and hence gives banks an incentive to mobilize
more stable funding sources.

While the motivations behind the changes in Basel III are widely accepted, there
is surprisingly little empirical evidence in support of the view that the
improvement in the updated capital and liquidity measures would ameliorate
banks’ financial health and reduce financial distress amongst global banks. This
paper tests these premises by studying the extent to which the updated capital
and liquidity measures predicted bank distress events in a cross-section of
Western European banks during the period 2008-2012.

To this end, we develop an early warning signal model of bank distress, that
builds on the insights of the large literature on bank failures in the
U.S. (examples of the most recent studies include Cole and White (2012) and
DeYoung and Torna (2013)). We estimate the model on a large sample of Western
European banks. Since outright bank bankruptcies in Europe are rare, we
construct an alternative distress indicator, which relies on bank-specific state
interventions. Specifically, we define distress events as the first time a given
bank in a sample experiences one of the following: (a) bankruptcy/liquidation,
(b) equity injection by the state (including nationalization), or (c) a bridge
loan by the state. Our sample contains a total of 134 bank distress events over
the period of the recent crisis.

Our early-warning model of bank distress features four groups of variables. The
first group pertains to the so called CAMELS rating system, which is the acronym
that stands for Capital adequacy, Asset quality, Management quality, Earnings
quality, Liquidity, and Sensitivity to systemic risk. The system is widely used
by the regulators in the U.S. in order to assess the health of financial
institutions, and has received relatively large empirical support in the
U.S.-based studies of bank distress (e.g. Cole and White, 2012).
The second group of variables used in our model are macroeconomics measures,
such as the real GDP growth, and inflation. In line with Betz et al. (2014), we
find that inclusion of macroeconomic indicators improves the out-of-sample
predictive power relative to models, based exclusively on accounting-based
variables.

Third, we include a number of measures that directly or indirectly relate to the
changes in regulation implemented in Basel III. Specifically, we analyze the
discriminative power of the equity ratios (quantity of capital), the level of
intangibles in the capital base (quality of capital), risk weighted assets,
off-balance sheet assets (asset quality), and two Basel liquidity ratios. We
find that the quality of capital base, risk weighted assets, and off-balance
sheet assets serve as relatively strong predictors of future distress. With
regard to liquidity, we find a limited evidence of predictive power for the
liquidity coverage ratio, and no evidence for the stable funding ratio. While
most of the above Basel-based variables are statistically significant, they
display only a modest improvement in the quality of the out-of-sample model
predictions relative to the CAMELS and macroeconomic variables.

Finally, we include the Merton (1974)-based distance-to-default (DD)
measure. Despite its strong theoretical foundation, one of the main problems of
the measure is that it can be directly computed only for listed banks. Since
listed banks constitute only a small fraction of the European banking universe,
the raw DD measure cannot be used as an early warning signal for most of the
banks. We circumvent this problem by proposing a novel implied
Distance-to-Default measure. The implied DD measure is constructed by modelling
the raw DD for listed banks via accounting- based measures and applying the
model estimates to the non-listed banks. Since there is very little theoretical
guidance on an optimal model of DD (based on the accounting information), we
follow the Bayesian Model Averaging approach, which considers a multitude of
accounting-based DD models and selects the ones with the highest evidence in the
data. We show that the implied DD measure exhibits a strong out-of-sample
distress forecasting performance, even after controlling for CAMELS variables,
BASEL variables, and macroeconomic measures.

The paper contributes to the existing literature on bank distress in a number of
important ways. First, it is the first to empirically assess the justifications
that underlie Basel III changes in capital and liquidity standards. Second, we
extend the market-based distance-to- default measure to non-listed banks, and
show that the resulting measure significantly outperforms (both in- and out-of
sample) other early warning measures suggested by the past literature. Third, we
contribute to the small but growing literature on the distress risk of European
banks, which has significantly lagged the U.S.-based bank-distress research,
primarily due to the relative lack of clean credit events. Similar to Betz et
al. (2014), our definition of distress event circumvents the problem of missing
bank bankruptcies, yet credibly captures the events that point to significantly
weak banks.












