---
layout: page
#
# Content
#
subheadline: "Research"
title: "Are Credit Rating Announcements Contagious? Evidence on the Transmission
of Information Across Industries in Credit Default Swap Market"
teaser: "The aim of this paper is to empirically test for the presence of
intra-industry informational transfers (IIIT) induced by rating signals in the
markets for corporate credit risk. In particular, we study the intra-industry
CDS spread responses to credit rating announcements made by S&P, Moody’s, and
Fitch between January 2003 and March 2011. "
categories:
  - research
tags:
  - Macroprudential Policy
  - Shadow Banking
  - Credit Growth
  - Systemic Risks
#
# Styling
#
header: no
image:
    <!-- title: mediaplayer_js-title.jpg -->
    <!-- thumb: mediaplayer_js-thumb.jpg -->
    <!-- homepage: MacroPrud_pic1.jpg -->
    <!-- caption: Photo by Corey Blaz -->
    <!-- caption_url: https://blaz.photography/ -->
mediaplayer: true
---

We find statistically and economically significant industry spread responses to
the announcements made by S&P, and only marginally significant and insignificant
industry spread responses to the rating signals of Moody’s and Fitch,
respectively. This suggests that S&P announcements contain the largest component
of the industry-wide information. In the case of S&P, we observe strong evidence
in favor of contagious IIIT, implying that on the day of announcement the
industry abnormal spreads tend to move in the same direction as the event-firm
spreads. This finding holds across all four types of rating events, and in
particular for the cases in which the event-firm spread reaction has its
predicted sign (positive (negative) spread change in the case of negative
(positive) rating news). The magnitude of the industry peer reaction (to S&P
announcements) is found to be about 6% of the event-firm abnormal spread
change. Stratification and multivariate regression analyses reveal a rich
pattern of IIIT behavior across several event-firm, event, and industry
characteristics. For negative rating events, contagious IIIT effects tend to be
stronger when event-companies: (a) are relatively large (only in the case of
downgrades), (b) come from industries with large industry peers, (c) have high
degree of cash-flow similarity with their industry peers, (d) are highly
leveraged, (e) have higher than industry-average credit rating before the event,
and (f) come from relatively credit-worthy industries. For positive rating
events, the contagious IIIT effects tend to increase with: (a) industry-peer
cash flow similarity, and (b) degree of financial distress, characterized by
below-average event-firm credit quality and low average industry credit
quality. These results contribute to our understanding of credit risk
correlations, and are consistent with recent theoretical models of credit risk
correlations of Giesecke [2004] and Collin-Dufresne et al. [2010a].










